>> Jem: We're going create
a database using SQLite.
We're going to write through it and
we want to write a visitor log for
a WebSocket server.
Remember that,
how we're just console logging data, but
it's not really going anywhere.
What we seem to a database
that way later with Aquarius.
So we're gonna be using
something called SQLites.
Sqlite, in my opinion,
is like one of the best databases around.
It's not the most powerful,
it's not the fastest, but
Sqlite is the most commonly used database
because it works on any platform.
You don't have to install
a separate service or anything.
You attach the database
to your application.
Versus any other database you have to
create a separate service you have
to maintain that with passwords and
all these things.
So sqlite is portable, it can just attach
it to your application, use it anywhere.
That's what we're gonna use it today,
if we use something like MySQL,
we had set of MySQL and then we'd set
up password and it'll be a whole thing.
We don't want to go there today.
So we're gonna use SQLite.
So you can do this on your server,
you can do this on VS Code and
let it pull in.
But first thing you want to
do is npm install sqlite3.
So I'm back in VS Code,
I'm in that index.ws or
dash WSJS file that express server
we created With WebSockets.
Now, we're on the database portion.
So I want to just make sure I have
a note of that, so end WebSockets,
just to make it easier to reason
about a little bit later.
And we're going to say begin database.
>> Jem: Then I wanna make
sure I have sqlite installed,
cuz I always make this mistake.
So npm i sqlite3.
>> Jem: Okay, everybody here so far?
>> Jem: So we didn't do much.
We only npm installed sqlite3 so far.
>> Jem: All right, and I will show you how
easy it is to use this database versus,
well, you won't know about the other ones
because we're not going to go into MySQL,
Redis or anything like that.
But sqlite is just a delight to use.
So, first thing we have to do is
we have to import the library.
So we're gonna say imports or
cons, sqlite equals require.
>> Jem: sqlite3, and
we're just gonna set up a new database.
So we're gonna say const db equals
new sqlite database, and it's a database.
And for this one,
we're gonna put it in memory.
So we just say call in memory,
>> Jem: Colon,
>> Jem: So that's pretty useful.
A lot of times you're gonna create a file.
If you want to say, write this
actually to the hard disk as a file,
you would say./.fullstackfrontend.db or
something like that.
>> Jem: It doesn't have to be a.db file.
It can actually be anything.
The.db is just to let us know it's
a database when we see it a little
bit later.
But for now we're going to use
memory just to make things a little
bit easier to reason about, but
it's really easy to use the file as well
>> Jem: Okay, yes.
>> Student 1: Because we're doing it in
memory whenever we restart the server,
the database will be
scrapped from scratch.
>> Jem: It'll be gone.
That's correct, yeah.
And you're saying, hey, for writing
these a memory, why don't we just use
a POJO a plain old JavaScript object to
save save memory that you can do that to?
The challenge with that is the database
will be easy to query because we're saving
things in a structured way.
You can do the same thing with a Say, like
a map or a set in JavaScript and make it
really structured, but the amount of code
it takes to get that structure down right?
It's just easier to write
a database in this case.
But yes, when you write things in memory,
it's gonna be the fastest way of doing
things, but it'll be gone
whenever we restart the server.
Good call out.
So next thing we wanna do is we
actually need to set up a table.
And we're gonna set up a table every time
the server starts again cuz it's all
written in memory.
So we don't have to do any
checks if the table exists.
So we're gonna say db.serialize,
that's just a function.
We're gonna close it off here.
>> Jem: And serialize command just ensures
that the database is set up before we run
any queries.
So it's going to run this first and
make sure the tables are set up.
So that way we're not trying to write
to a table that doesn't exist just yet.
So next thing we need to do,
we're gonna write some SQL.
Hang on, hang on to yourself.
We're gonna write some SQL.
It's gonna look a little weird,
but it'll make sense of the time.
We're all done.
We're just gonna add a little bit of SQL.
Not enough to make your
head hurt hopefully.
So whenever we wanna run a SQL command,
we need to use db.run and
that's gonna let us write SQL.
And I'm gonna put the back tick in here
because it's gonna be a multi-line string
just to make it easier to read.
It can be one line.
I like to be easy to read.
So we're gonna say create table.
>> Jem: And the actual SQL commands,
by convention, you write them in Caps.
So you understand the difference
between what's input and
what is actually part of
the programming language itself.
And we wanna create table called visitors,
cuz we're logging the visitors
that come to our site.
So to create visitors,
we need to create the actual fields.
Remember, fields were the columns.
So we're gonna put a parenthesis there.
I'm just gonna make this a new
line to make it easier to read.
And we really only need two things for
this really simple table.
We need the counts.
So we want to count how
many people are here.
And we have to give it a type,
because SQL is structured,
we're dealing with
relational databases here.
So data's always structured and
always has a type.
>> Jem: And we probably want to know
what time things are happening.
So time in SQLite is just a text.
It's nothing fancy.
If you're using, say, MySQL, the time
has its own type, which is useful for
running built-in commands to make
it easy for querying types, but
having do any sort of conversions.
But SQLite is pretty bare-bone,
which is what we want in this case.
>> Jem: Yeah, question.
>> Student 2: Could we also use
time like a Unix timestamp or
the JavaScript now command, that would
give us like an integer value of time?
>> Jem: Yeah, however,
SQLite has that built in into it.
So we can just say now and
it'll write it in time as a text format,
which is pretty handy.
But yeah, you can use JavaScript now,
et cetera,
but databases almost always have
their own way of dealing with time.
Because anybody's ever had to
deal with like leap years or
what's it called like leap seconds.
All these like nuances or
my mind is blinking on time zones.
Time Zones is like a really hard problem
in computer science because like I wrote
a database at 5 o'clock on Eastern Time.
But I'm reading it as a server
it's written in West, and
I'm in California reading it.
What time did the thing actually happen?
The time when it is written, or
the place where the server is at, or
the place where I'm at.
It's a whole hard problem.
Google has an entire engineering team
dedicated to just dealing with time
because it's that hard of a problem.
And most people just use UTC, and that's
what probably we should all use, but
everybody's got to have
their own timezone now.
That's a whole different topic.
So we have this command to create a table,
and
it's gonna have two columns,
count in integer or accounts and time.
And the serializer is just gonna make sure
our database is set up before any queries
are ready to go.
So now,
I'm gonna create a shorthand function so
I don't have to repeat my
SQL queries over and over.
I'm gonna call it getCounts.
And this will just query my visitor
table to let me get the counts.
That way I'll have to rewrite
select star from visitors, etc.
So we're gonna use that DB command again.
This time we're gonna say each,
because we're tryna get
the output of every single row.
We wanna count that together.
And I wanna know how many visitors
were at every single time interval
that we specify.
So we're gonna say, DB each, which is
gonna say, every row, do something.
So DB each, and we're gonna write
a start function, old habit.
We're gonna write a basic query here.
So we're gonna say select
star from visitors.
Remember, select star
is just that wildcard.
Give me every single field in that row.
I know I can't play visitors, visitors.
>> Jem: I promise I can type.
And the second argument
is gonna be a function.
You can call the function to an arrow
function, doesn't really matter.
>> Jem: And
the first argument is gonna be error.
We don't really have to
deal with that too much.
But really what we really want is the row.
And we're just gonna log the row, oops.
>> Jem: Yeah, not bad.
And this saves us from having to write
the SQL query every single time.
We just wrap it in a function.
There's also something called prepared
statements, we can save these and
just execute them later.
That's almost always what you do.
You never, never,
never wanna write freehand SQL or
allow people to write freehand
SQL like your clients.
Why is that?
>> Student 2: Drop your tables.
>> Jem: Yes,
if someone has access to your database,
that's almost as bad as
access to your server.
They can drop tables,
they can read all your data.
In fact, it's even better cuz they
don't have to get into your SSH key and
read access, all that mess,
you let them into your data storage.
So we never run SQL directly,
this is the learning experience here.
We always have prepared statements.
So that way, it's a finite set of
instructions that people can run.
When it comes to MySQL and Redis or
Mongo or some of the other databases,
there's always user permissions,
what people are allowed to do,
similar to the Linux versions.
But SQLite has none of that,
because we don't need to go that far.
It's a simple example.
And that's why it's the best database,
cuz it's really, really simple.
But in real life, database security
is very, very, very, very important.
>> Jem: The last command we're gonna run
is, we're gonna call this one shutdown DB.
>> Jem: And we're writing a function here.
>> Jem: Because every
time we use a database,
we need to close it by the time
the server is all done.
We never wanna leave a database connection
open because it'll just stay open
persistently.
Then you're gonna run out of
connections to your database.
So whenever we're done, the server's done,
we close our database connection.
The same way we do when we wrote a server,
we ended that request because a server
doesn't know when you're done with it.
So we have to be very explicit here.
So here, before we shut down, I wanna say,
give me the final counts for
the day of all the visitors to my server.
So we'll just call it getCounts,
which will console log out all the rows.
And then we'll add a nice
little helper here,
a nice little log that just says,
shutting down, oops.
>> Jem: Db.
>> Jem: And then we just call db.close.
>> Jem: But when we call shutdownDB,
we see cuz there's
syntax highlighting it saying, hey, you
wrote this function, you never call it.
All we need to do is,
we need to catch the interrupt signal.
So that's the Ctrl+C is known as a signal
interrupts through our process, and
you'll see a call to seconds.
And we just need to catch that and
then call shutdown command on that.
Other than that,
the server doesn't know when it's getting
killed cuz it's just it just stops.
That'd be kind of ridiculous if it's
like hey, hey, hey, you need to stop and
the server's like, well, I'm not done yet,
let me finish my thing cuz
that would be annoying.
Cuz if you're trying to kill a server,
you want it to be done.
So we need to catch that signal
interrupts before anything happens.
And right when we're unloading the server,
we wanna dump the information we need.
So we're gonna do that with
what's called a listener, and
we talked a bit about listeners.
But on this one,
we're gonna use a process listener.
So I'm gonna put it right here.
We can say process.on,
>> Jem: And
SIGINT is signal interrupts,
the control C.
>> Jem: Make an anonymous function
to respond to do something.
So on SIGINT, we wanna make sure we
shut down the server gracefully.
So we call server.close just to
clean up any loose connections.
In that itself,
we can put a function to call.
Now, that one we're gonna
call the shutdownDB.
>> Jem: Okay, we're almost there.
What are we missing though?
So we created a database, we created
a table, we make sure everything's cleaned
up nicely and it's gonna dump the data
to the console before we close it.
What did we forget to do?
>> Student 3: [INAUDIBLE]
>> Jem: Yeah,
we never actually wrote
any data to the database.
We have this beautiful database all
set up, we have the columns, but
we didn't actually write any data.
So let's do that inside our
websocket server itself, or
inside our websocket connection.
So whenever a connection happens,
we wanna log the total number
of visitors in the current time.
So this we could probably wrap as
a function, but we'll just do it in here.
So we'll say dbrun.
So to insert something into the database,
we say insert, oops, caps lock,
>> Jem: INTO the table, visitors.
>> Jem: We're gonna insert these two
columns, fields, counts, and time
>> Jem: And let's close that off.
Next, we need to insert the values.
And this is where SQL's kind of, it's less
than intuitive that you have to do this.
Oops, make this multi line
look a little easier.
>> Jem: So
we're inserting to the count time,
so we have to call values as
the actual things we're inserting into.
>> Jem: And the values are the total
number of clients, so that counts.
And we save that to a variable up here,
so this is called num clients.
>> Jem: And next value is now,
however that's a built-in.
We talked about time and
how databases that have their
own ways of dealing with it.
So that's actually a built-in
function into SQL Lite.
So let's call daytime as a function,
and we'll just say now.
>> Student 2: Since date time is
a built-in function should that be
capitalized, or is it particularly,
like is all caps specifically for
things that are immediately
related to tables?
>> Jem: Yeah, all caps is generally
convention, you don't have to do it, but
it's just for the SQL commands because
it makes it a lot easier to read.
And you're like what's my
data versus what's built in.
datetime is a function so it's
lowercase generally, but good question.
So now, the moment of truth.
Does this all work?
I don't know,
we'll see where we made a mistake, or
where I made a mistake
somewhere along the way.
So let's fire this up.
We say node index WS.
No errors so far.
We can jump back to my website,
but we're on localhost.
>> Jem: Something went wrong,
it just crashed, let's find out.
>> Jem: A syntax error.
>> Jem: Error one SQLITE ERROR near time,
where is time?
>> Student 3: Also on
the line 56 [INAUDIBLE].
>> Jem: Line 56.
>> Student 3: [INAUDIBLE]
>> Jem: Looks right.
>> Student 3: 36?
>> Jem: It's the little
things that'll get you.
It's got a comma.
>> Jem: I knew it, it's always something.
That's why we do this together,
we do it live.
>> Student 3: Before you,
go back and check line 66 also.
>> Jem: 66.
>> Student 3: [INAUDIBLE]
>> Jem: Good catch.
>> Student 3: Yeah, [INAUDIBLE].
>> Jem: Good catch, chat.
All right, let's try this again.
All right, back to our browser,
>> Jem: All right,
well, it didn't crash this time,
so that's good.
Let me open another window.
Why did it crash there?
That's a new one.
So it worked the first time,
it didn't work the second time, so
there must be another error.
>> Jem: Table visitor has no column time.
>> Student 1: If we crash
the server ungracefully,
we need to remake the table,
cuz we didn't delete it properly.
>> Jem: Because it's all sort of memory
the minute the server goes down,
it's gonna just be erased for memory.
That's why we're using the memory and
not the db,
otherwise we'd have to check if
the table existed and then rebuild it.
We could do it, it's just another command.
>> Student 1: I'm getting an error
that table visitors already exists.
>> Jem: Man, the comma again,
it's the little things.
It's the little things that'll get you,
especially when writing SQL.
All right, let's try this again.
Big money, big money,
no whammy, no whammy.
All right, it didn't crash.
Let's try opening another one.
Two visitors, it didn't crash.
Okay, so I'm already doing
better than I did before.
So let's go ahead and stop that server and
see if we actually wrote
anything to the database.
So I'm going to open VS code again.
Ctrl+C is gonna give
it a signal interrupt.
I did something wrong here
cuz the signal isn't working.
>> Jem: Max listeners event leak,
so there's a memory leak somewhere.
That means I didn't close
something properly.
Let me double check.
So let me add,
>> Jem: Maybe a log in here,
>> Jem: See if it even makes it this far,
but we're stuck.
But remember,
this whole slide on in case you get stuck.
And what do we say we can do?
We can get an exit back to my computer.
We can pkill node, cuz remember,
I said it's possible to get stuck in
a running process and now I can't kill it.
Cuz I did something of but
I'm gonna say pkill node,
which terminated my server.
So we ran into a little bit of
trouble with the sigands and
a race condition,
it seemed like something wasn't closing.
But we dove in a little bit and
we found out,
you know what the problem is is we
never close the WebSocket connection.
That's actually keeping it all open,
so hence the sigand never works.
So we never shut down
the database properly.
So the way we can do that is we'll
go through all the clients, and
right before the server shuts down let's
make sure we close the database out.
So we can say WSS, same as we did before,
let's grab all the clients,
and we'll say for each,
>> Jem: And
we'll say function, and
give it a name, so easier debugging.
And that's gonna take a client.
It's gonna give us a client, and then,
>> Jem: So
next, we just call client.close.
>> Jem: So what this does is when we tell
the server with Ctrl+C we're gonna go
through every single WebSocket connection,
and we're going to close it and
then we're going to close the server.
And then we're gonna shut down
the database, so let's see if that works.
>> Jem: And
we'll open up our browser again,
we'll write a few times, maybe a few more.
>> Jem: And there we go.
>> Jem: So it's tricky,
once you start catching signals and
doing things like that, you have to think
really carefully about what's going on.
So in this case we had
three open connections.
So we had three types of open connections.
We had the WebSocket connection
that was open to all the clients.
We had the server connection that was
open, and we have the database connection,
and it's shut down properly and cleanly.
We had to run all of those.
So that was a fun debugging experience.
A little bit tricky, it's the edge
cases you have to look out for.
>> Jem: So now we have our WebSocket
server, we're logging into the database.
We have a database as well.
Let's go ahead and
commit all that to our websites.
So I'm gonna run git status as I do,
to see what's going on.
Git add, git commits-am,
Add database logging,
>> Jem: And we'll just git push.
And because of cron jobs running on
a server, it will pull it down and
we'll have a database now running
our application really easy.
And that's why I love SQL lite is
we don't have to install anything
other than the SQL lite library.
It doesn't require some service
to bring up the start and stop.
We do that all from
the application itself.
It's pretty cool.
If you've ever worked with databases,
you know kind of what a pain they are,
and this is so much easier.
So we did it.
We installed SQL Lite,
we set up a database, we set up the table,
the columns, and then on connection
we say the visitor count.
Three simple instructions, but
it turns out it's a little bit
more complicated than we thought.
>> Jem: And there's a link to slides.
The fully working example if you need.
>> Jem: And if you wanna play with MySQL,
MySQL.js is probably the default if
you wanna get really complicated.
But, depending on how this went for you,
you may not want it to have SQL yet for
a long time.
I don't blame you, it's for
some people, it's not for others.